README.md, before:

# MyAstroSessions
## What is it about?
I started this program to keep track of my personal astrophoto sessions. I started this hobby recently in 2021.

Each night under the sky produces lots of data, mainly - all the different types of captured images.
Sometimes I manage to document everything during a capturing session, either on paper on in a textfile - sometimes not.

What is there in any case are the images on the hard drive - and they hold lots of information. 
I could of course use some tools to browse exif and fits headers and collect what I need - everytime. 
OR I could write a tool - once, that does it for me - everytime.   

## What I'm interested in? 
- Which equipment (optical, cameras, mount ...) did I use for a session?
- How many subs of which type did I capture during a special session?
- What have been the capture settings (exposure, iso, gain, bias)?
- How much total exposure, how much per capture setting ...?
- Perhaps some previews of the resulting images ...
- direct access to my session-related notes (if I managed to do some, or just to document things later on)
- a timeline (when did I capture what? What did I capture last october?)
- some kind of searching/filtering features 
- ... and much more



## How does it work?
### The main concept
The main goal is to treat the filesystem and the images as the "database". 
The tool will only read and never modify existing data nor create any secondary database(s). Modifications to the file-structure shall be done outside the app by normal OS file-system tools.
(I don't want to risk a loss of important data.)

There are just two exceptions to this rule:
- It allows to create a suitable structure for a new capture session in a place of your choice.
- The app may produce a ".myastro.session" file in a session folder to store equipment-related information

Apart from that it will save some general configuration stuff in a ".config/myastrosessions/" folder under your user-home.

### The folder structure
My workflow - and therefore the organization of the files on the disk - is inspired by Siril https://siril.org/ (one of the coolest Open Source projects on earth).

Such capture sessions may produce structures like this one:
- Leo-Triplet;-)
    - **2023-03-08**-Capture session 1
      - lights
          - lots of images
      - darks
          - lots of images
      - flats
          - lots of images
      - biases
          - lots of images
      - some leo-triplet.fits/tiffs/jpegs as result images

**NOTE**: The date prefix in the session name is MANDATORY. Otherwise this folder will not be recognized as a capture session.

It does not matter how deep in the folder structure such a session folder is "hidden". 
You may have your own structuring of all the top folders, e.g. by galaxies, nebulae etc. 
As soon as there is a folder starting with the mentioned date prefix, it is treated as a capture session.
The name of the direct parent folder is interpreted as the name of the Astro-Object that was the target of that session. 

Btw. if you use filters the lights part may also look like this 
(any folder name that does not start with a "." or "_" directly below the lights folder is treated as a Filter):
    
    - 2023-03-09-Capture session 2
      - lights
          - L
              - lots of images
          - R
              - lots of images
          - G
              - lots of images
          - B
              - lots of images
          - H alpha
              - lots of images
          - name-of-another-expensive-filter
              - lots of images
      - [calibration frame part looks as above]

Until now the tool works on such type of structure, just because - it works for me ;-), 
It may be extended and adapted to other common structures, if there is interest.

## How does it look like?

The main application window with some details for a selected session:

![grafik](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/127389748/224138696-ba87a7af-1ba3-4c56-9573-0f1542d37c07.png)

The timeline view with an active Filter ("bode") and the details of one of the sessions that matched this filter: 

![grafik](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/127389748/224138976-5eed099b-5b29-430a-bd44-debc6d30cf69.png)

The dialog to configure equipment and assign some keywords that can be looked up in the image metadata.

![grafik](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/127389748/224139145-01c064ec-2bce-4a1d-bb94-ee6b1baa23e0.png)
(Hmm - localization not fully done :-)

## The more technical stuff ...
I implemented the app in a mix of Kotlin and Java. 
The result is a jar-file that should be standalone and runnable with any Java runtime 1.8 or higher.
I developed and tested it only on Linux so far. I don't have access to Mac or Windows machines, 
but I will try to test at least the Windows part in a VM one day. Please leave me a comment or issue with your experience!

You can find the latest pre-packaged jar under the "bin" folder. 
Btw. I picked 0.9 as the initial version number, because I had the feeling that roughly 90% of my bucket list is implemented.  
Just download it to somewhere on your machine and then run:

`java -jar MyAstroSessions-0.9.jar`

Or maybe you just have to double-click on the Jar-file. It works in both ways in my Arch Linux.

Alternatively - if you want to build it on your own - you need to have Maven (https://maven.apache.org/) installed on your machine, 
then clone the whole repo, run:

`mvn package`

in the top folder - cross your fingers - and if you are lucky there should be a "MyAstroSessions-0.9.jar" in the "target" folder. 
(I struggled a bit with the correct maven pom.xml but finally found a configuration that worked in my Linux setup.)

On the first start (or actually at the first exit ;-) it should create some config files in your-home-folder/.config/myastrosessions. 
This is how it works on Linux - I hope it does similar things on MacOS and Windows.

## What else ...?
The App is not intended to be a first class image viewer. 

It produces some previews and can show standard images (jpeg, png, tiff etc.), but (at the moment) without any comfort functions like zooming etc. 

Display of RAW DSLR images (NEF, CR2 ...) is not possible yet at all - any help on that topic is welcome! 

The display of FITS images is limited to the first image layer for now, but it is rather fast. 
Credits for the fits-library go to: http://nom-tam-fits.github.io/nom-tam-fits/index.html 

The exif-metadata part is using https://github.com/drewnoakes/metadata-extractor - thanks to Drew Noakes for this peace of SW!

## Btw...
The app comes with an english and a german localization. You can switch between them in the menu - it becomes active after a program restart.

Commit message:

updated statement about display of Fits images
wrote own Fits preview code, working for most files. Still an issue with correct Interpretation of fits files written by Gimp

README.md, after:

# MyAstroSessions
## What is it about?
I started this program to keep track of my personal astrophoto sessions. I started this hobby recently in 2021.

Each night under the sky produces lots of data, mainly - all the different types of captured images.
Sometimes I manage to document everything during a capturing session, either on paper on in a textfile - sometimes not.

What is there in any case are the images on the hard drive - and they hold lots of information. 
I could of course use some tools to browse exif and fits headers and collect what I need - everytime. 
OR I could write a tool - once, that does it for me - everytime.   

## What I'm interested in? 
- Which equipment (optical, cameras, mount ...) did I use for a session?
- How many subs of which type did I capture during a special session?
- What have been the capture settings (exposure, iso, gain, bias)?
- How much total exposure, how much per capture setting ...?
- Perhaps some previews of the resulting images ...
- direct access to my session-related notes (if I managed to do some, or just to document things later on)
- a timeline (when did I capture what? What did I capture last october?)
- some kind of searching/filtering features 
- ... and much more



## How does it work?
### The main concept
The main goal is to treat the filesystem and the images as the "database". 
The tool will only read and never modify existing data nor create any secondary database(s). Modifications to the file-structure shall be done outside the app by normal OS file-system tools.
(I don't want to risk a loss of important data.)

There are just two exceptions to this rule:
- It allows to create a suitable structure for a new capture session in a place of your choice.
- The app may produce a ".myastro.session" file in a session folder to store equipment-related information

Apart from that it will save some general configuration stuff in a ".config/myastrosessions/" folder under your user-home.

### The folder structure
My workflow - and therefore the organization of the files on the disk - is inspired by Siril https://siril.org/ (one of the coolest Open Source projects on earth).

Such capture sessions may produce structures like this one:
- Leo-Triplet;-)
    - **2023-03-08**-Capture session 1
      - lights
          - lots of images
      - darks
          - lots of images
      - flats
          - lots of images
      - biases
          - lots of images
      - some leo-triplet.fits/tiffs/jpegs as result images

**NOTE**: The date prefix in the session name is MANDATORY. Otherwise this folder will not be recognized as a capture session.

It does not matter how deep in the folder structure such a session folder is "hidden". 
You may have your own structuring of all the top folders, e.g. by galaxies, nebulae etc. 
As soon as there is a folder starting with the mentioned date prefix, it is treated as a capture session.
The name of the direct parent folder is interpreted as the name of the Astro-Object that was the target of that session. 

Btw. if you use filters the lights part may also look like this 
(any folder name that does not start with a "." or "_" directly below the lights folder is treated as a Filter):
    
    - 2023-03-09-Capture session 2
      - lights
          - L
              - lots of images
          - R
              - lots of images
          - G
              - lots of images
          - B
              - lots of images
          - H alpha
              - lots of images
          - name-of-another-expensive-filter
              - lots of images
      - [calibration frame part looks as above]

Until now the tool works on such type of structure, just because - it works for me ;-), 
It may be extended and adapted to other common structures, if there is interest.

## How does it look like?

The main application window with some details for a selected session:

![grafik](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/127389748/224138696-ba87a7af-1ba3-4c56-9573-0f1542d37c07.png)

The timeline view with an active Filter ("bode") and the details of one of the sessions that matched this filter: 

![grafik](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/127389748/224138976-5eed099b-5b29-430a-bd44-debc6d30cf69.png)

The dialog to configure equipment and assign some keywords that can be looked up in the image metadata.

![grafik](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/127389748/224139145-01c064ec-2bce-4a1d-bb94-ee6b1baa23e0.png)
(Hmm - localization not fully done :-)

## The more technical stuff ...
I implemented the app in a mix of Kotlin and Java. 
The result is a jar-file that should be standalone and runnable with any Java runtime 1.8 or higher.
I developed and tested it only on Linux so far. I don't have access to Mac or Windows machines, 
but I will try to test at least the Windows part in a VM one day. Please leave me a comment or issue with your experience!

You can find the latest pre-packaged jar under the "bin" folder. 
Btw. I picked 0.9 as the initial version number, because I had the feeling that roughly 90% of my bucket list is implemented.  
Just download it to somewhere on your machine and then run:

`java -jar MyAstroSessions-0.9.jar`

Or maybe you just have to double-click on the Jar-file. It works in both ways in my Arch Linux.

Alternatively - if you want to build it on your own - you need to have Maven (https://maven.apache.org/) installed on your machine, 
then clone the whole repo, run:

`mvn package`

in the top folder - cross your fingers - and if you are lucky there should be a "MyAstroSessions-0.9.jar" in the "target" folder. 
(I struggled a bit with the correct maven pom.xml but finally found a configuration that worked in my Linux setup.)

On the first start (or actually at the first exit ;-) it should create some config files in your-home-folder/.config/myastrosessions. 
This is how it works on Linux - I hope it does similar things on MacOS and Windows.

## What else ...?
The App is not intended to be a first class image viewer. 

It produces some previews and can show standard images (jpeg, png, tiff etc.), but (at the moment) without any comfort functions like zooming etc. 

Display of RAW DSLR images (NEF, CR2 ...) is not possible yet at all - any help on that topic is welcome! 

The display of FITS images works (now also in color) for most files I have tried. There is still an issue with some fits-files written by Gimp (interpreting the color range wrong and producing unusable previews). 
Credits for the fits-library go to: http://nom-tam-fits.github.io/nom-tam-fits/index.html 

The exif-metadata part is using https://github.com/drewnoakes/metadata-extractor - thanks to Drew Noakes for this peace of SW!

## Btw...
The app comes with an english and a german localization. You can switch between them in the menu - it becomes active after a program restart.
